IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
8500309
Saliency-LOAM: Saliency-Based LiDAR
Odometry and Mapping
Ke Wang , Member, IEEE, Kai Chen , Juwei Guo , and Jianbo Lu , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) is
a critical research topic in autonomous driving, robotics, and
related ﬁelds. Although LiDAR-based SLAM methods achieve
excellent performance, they primarily extract feature points
from the geometric structure of point clouds, failing to mitigate
the adverse eﬀects of noise interference on feature matching,
which leads to inaccurate localization in complex environments.
In this article, we present Saliency-LOAM, a novel LiDAR
odometry method based on point cloud saliency. The framework
proposes Saliency-Net, a feature extraction network that inte-
grates geometric, intensity, and semantic information of point
clouds to eﬀectively predict the saliency information of diﬀerent
regions in 3-D scenes. It assigns higher saliency weights to
regions with greater feature stability. During the feature matching
process, saliency weights are utilized to adjust the distance
residual term, ensuring that the optimization equation focuses
on more stable and higher-quality point cloud regions, thereby
iteratively optimizing to achieve more accurate pose estimation.
Experimental results on public datasets and real-world scenarios
show that, compared to existing methods, the point cloud saliency
mechanism better suppresses the negative impact of noise in raw
point cloud data on point cloud matching, signiﬁcantly improving
the robustness and accuracy of LiDAR SLAM systems. Our
code will be open-sourced at https://github.com/ck-png/Saliency-
LOAM
Index Terms—LiDAR odometry, point cloud saliency, simulta-
neous localization and mapping (SLAM).
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N THE ﬁeld of autonomous driving, precise environ-
mental perception and reliable real-time localization are
crucial for achieving advanced autonomous driving systems.
Currently, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
has become an indispensable key technology due to its
unique advantages. Given the diﬀerences in sensor types,
Received 2 July 2025; revised 14 October 2025; accepted 26 October 2025.
Date of publication 11 December 2025; date of current version 8 January 2026.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 52372408 and in part by the Open Fund of State Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Vehicle Safety Technology. The Associate Editor
coordinating the review process was Dr. Jing Yuan. (Corresponding author:
Ke Wang.)
Ke Wang is with the State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Vehicle Safety
Technology, Chongqing Changan Automobile Company Ltd., Chongqing
400020, China, and also with the College of Mechanical and Vehicle
Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China (e-mail:
kewang@cqu.edu.cn).
Kai Chen and Juwei Guo are with the College of Mechanical and Vehi-
cle Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China (e-mail:
chenkai@stu.cqu.edu.cn; guojuwei@stu.cqu.edu.cn).
Jianbo Lu is with the Department of Vehicle Engineering, Geely Automo-
bile Research Institute, Ningbo 315336, China (e-mail: jianbo.lu@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIM.2025.3643077
LiDAR-based SLAM oﬀers signiﬁcant advantages over visual
SLAM [1], [2]. Regardless of lighting or weather conditions,
LiDAR sensors provide consistent and accurate data. Existing
LiDAR SLAM methods [3], [4], [5], [6] primarily rely on
geometric features of point clouds to estimate pose and
construct maps. Researchers explore additional point cloud
information, including intensity and semantic information, to
assist in extracting more stable features and enhance the
performance of SLAM systems.
Saliency, initially popularized in visual tasks, is a mecha-
nism that emulates human visual attention, whereby humans
focus on prominent objects and automatically assign higher
weights to such targets when performing self-localization
through visual perception. For instance, when navigating
unknown environments, humans tend to focus on distinctive
landmarks such as buildings or signs to determine their posi-
tion, as these objects exhibit prominent and stable features. In
the ﬁeld of visual SLAM, our prior work SBAS [7] computes
saliency maps by incorporating geometric and semantic infor-
mation from images, ultimately enhancing the performance
of visual odometry. In LiDAR-based SLAM, studies [8],
[9] integrate geometric and intensity information of point
clouds and design distinct weighting functions for line and
plane feature points, eﬀectively suppressing uncertainties in
feature matching introduced by noisy point clouds. However,
relying solely on geometric and intensity information limits
a comprehensive understanding of the environment. Semantic
information provides richer feature representations, oﬀering
the potential to improve localization accuracy and enable more
intelligent functionalities for downstream planning tasks [10].
Therefore, we propose Saliency-LOAM, which, in addition to
geometric information, further integrates intensity and seman-
tic information of point clouds. The detailed analysis is as
follows.
Geometric information enables the initial extraction of line
and plane features in the environment, although it still includes
noise. Intensity information reﬂects the material properties
and light reﬂectance capabilities of diﬀerent objects, with
distinct objects exhibiting strong gradient changes at edges.
These changes are stable, facilitating the identiﬁcation of more
reliable line and plane features and ﬁltering out extraneous
noise. Furthermore, the semantic information of point clouds
provides high-level environmental understanding, allowing
focus on objects such as vehicles, trees, and utility poles,
which possess more stable geometric structures compared to
other point clouds. This addresses the limitation of traditional
1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8500309
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Fig. 1.
Saliency-net module (the part with orange and purple) takes the projected 2-D images as input and generates the saliency point cloud through
back-projection. The feature extraction module extracts line features and plane features. Based on the saliency values provided by the saliency point cloud,
the saliency feature matching module minimizes the distance between line feature points and lines, as well as the distance between plane feature points and
planes through iterative optimization, which emphasizes the optimization of more salient and critical features. Finally, the pose estimation module performs
pose estimation based on the matching results.
line and plane features, which fail to leverage advanced
geometric structures in the environment. To this end, we
propose Saliency-Net, which eﬀectively integrates these three
types of information to compute saliency information. This
approach not only extracts more stable line and plane features
but also assigns higher weights to them during feature match-
ing, thereby enhancing the accuracy and robustness of LiDAR
SLAM systems.
This article proposes Saliency-LOAM, a LiDAR-based
SLAM method that introduces the concept of saliency to the
ﬁeld of LiDAR odometry for the ﬁrst time, enabling accurate,
robust, and real-time localization and mapping. Speciﬁcally,
our contributions are as follows.
1) We propose Saliency-Net, a neural network designed to
predict point cloud saliency, integrating geometric infor-
mation, intensity information, and semantic information
from LiDAR point clouds. To better guide network
training, we create a dataset with saliency ground truth
based on these information types. Through supervised
training, Saliency-Net eﬀectively predicts point cloud
saliency in autonomous driving scenarios.
2) Based on Saliency-Net, we propose Saliency-LOAM,
a LiDAR SLAM method incorporating the point cloud
saliency mechanism. In the feature matching stage, the
algorithm utilizes predicted saliency weights to constrain
distance residual calculations, enabling it to focus on
feature-stable point cloud regions, thereby enhancing the
robustness and accuracy of point cloud feature matching
and pose estimation.
3) Experimental results on open-source datasets demon-
strate the eﬀectiveness of the point cloud saliency
mechanism, with our method outperforming state-of-
the-art approaches in pose estimation performance and
mapping quality. To validate practical applicability, we
conduct real-vehicle comparison tests based on a campus
environment. Our method achieves superior performance
across numerous challenging scenarios.
II. METHOD
As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed Saliency-LOAM consists
of four main modules: feature extraction, point cloud saliency
prediction, saliency feature matching, and pose estimation.
A. Design of Saliency Weights
Geometric information includes distance information and
local curvature. For a point Pi(xi, yi, zi, Ii), where xi, yi, and
zi are the 3-D coordinates and Ii is the intensity value,
distance information is obtained using the following formula,
which reﬂects the spatial structure and geometric shape of the
3-D point cloud, facilitating the acquisition of local curvature.
This also ensures alignment between saliency information and
the original point cloud, while supporting the extraction of
semantic information
ri =
q
x2
i + y2
i + z2
i .
(1)
For local curvature, we utilize a local smoothness measure,
denoted as ci, to represent the local curvature. Taking n points
adjacent to the current point i to form a point set N, setting
rj as the distance information of the jth point, then the local
smoothness ci of the current point i is calculated as follows:
ci =
1
2n · ∥ri∥2
2

X
j∈s,j,i
 r j −ri


2
2
.
(2)
Speciﬁcally, during the ﬁltering process, thresholds THline
and THplane need to be set for line and plane features, respec-
tively. Points with local curvature ci ≥THline are selected
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
WANG et al.: SALIENCY-LOAM: SALIENCY-BASED LiDAR ODOMETRY AND MAPPING
8500309
Fig. 2. Cylindrical projection of point cloud. (a) Point cloud cylindrical graph.
(b) Point cloud 3-D coordinate system.
as line feature points, while those with ci ≤THplane are
considered plane feature points.
For intensity information, we use K-nearest neighbors
(KNN) to identify the neighborhood Ni of point Pi. Taking the
x-direction as an example, the intensity gradient is computed
as follows:
∂I
∂x =
X
pj∈Ni
wij ·
 Ii −Ij

·
x j −xi
p j −pi

(3)
where wij is the Gaussian weight, accounting for the contri-
bution of spatial distance to the gradient, deﬁned as
wij = exp
 
−
pj −pi
2
2σ2
!
(4)
where pj is a neighboring point, Ij is the intensity value of
point p j, and xj is the coordinate of pj. The above computation
yields the gradient vector as follows:
∇Ii =
 ∂I
∂x, ∂I
∂y, ∂I
∂z

.
(5)
Subsequently, the magnitude of the intensity gradient is
obtained as
∥∇Ii∥=
s ∂I
∂x
2
+
∂I
∂y
2
+
∂I
∂z
2
.
(6)
By setting an appropriate threshold, more stable point cloud
regions are selected for subsequent processing.
The Semantic KITTI dataset [11] provides comprehensive
semantic labels. Since point clouds belonging to semantic
categories exhibit greater feature stability than nonsemantic
point clouds, while dynamically semantic point clouds tend
to suppress feature matching, we assign the semantic weight
Msem a uniform weight of 1 to statically semantic point clouds,
dynamically semantic point clouds and nonsemantic point
clouds are assigned a weight of 0.
As shown in Fig. 2, the number of lasers is the image height
H, and the top and bottom pitch angles are FUp and FDown,
the ﬁeld of view of LiDAR can be obtained as F = FUp −
FDown, and the width of the image W is the number of times
the laser scans a week. We obtain the distance map, local
curvature map, semantic map, and intensity map of the point
cloud according to the following formula:
 u
v

=
2
64
1
2
h
1 + arctan

yp
xp

π−1i
W

1 −

zp
√
x2p+y2p+z2p −FDown

F−1

H
3
75 .
(7)
Fig. 3. Projection maps of various point cloud information. (a) Distance map.
(b) Local curvature map. (c) Semantic map. (d) Intensity map. (e) Saliency
map.
Then, image pyramids are computed separately for distance
and intensity images. Gaussian ﬁltering is then applied to the
images of diﬀerent sizes. Subsequently, ITTI [12] saliency
computation is performed on both the ﬁltered and preﬁltered
images to obtain distance feature maps Ds and intensity feature
maps Is for the point cloud.
The projected data points within a cell (u, v) are deﬁned as
a set. For the intensity feature map Is, the average intensity
gradient variation Iavg(u, v) within each cell is computed as the
conﬁdence weight. For the distance map Ds, the local distance
variance Varr(u, v) within each cell is calculated, as dense
regions often exhibit distinctive features. An exponentially
decaying distance weighting scheme is also incorporated to
impose a constraint, since points closer to the sensor are
generally more important; the two factors are combined to
form the conﬁdence measure. For the local curvature, the
average curvature within each cell is directly computed as
Cavg(u, v). The three types of information are individually
normalized and then weighted, and ﬁnally summed with the
semantic weight Msem(u, v), which is 1 or 0. Thus, the saliency
weight S (u, v) for cell (u, v) is given by
S (u, v) = Norm
 Norm
 Iavg (u, v) · Is (u, v)

+ Norm (wd (u, v) · Ds (u, v))
+ Norm
 Cavg (u, v)

+ Msem (u, v)

(8)
wd (u, v) = exp

−Varr (u, v)
σ2v
−µr (u, v)2
2σ2
d

(9)
where Varr(u, v) is the local distance variance, µr(u, v) is the
mean distance, and σ2
v, σ2
d are scaling parameters.
Norm
refers
to
the
standard
Min-Max
normalization
method, which linearly maps diﬀerent features to a uniﬁed
interval [0, 1]. For a given input set, where x is the current
value, max(x) is the maximum value, and min(x) is the
minimum value, the normalization is deﬁned as follows:
Norm (x) =
x −min (x)
max (x) −min (x).
(10)
Since feature data of diﬀerent types exhibit varying
orders of magnitude, single-layer normalization may signiﬁ-
cantly weaken features with smaller scales. In contrast, our
two-layer normalization approach eliminates biases caused by
diﬀerences in physical dimensions and numerical ranges. In
summary, we utilize multiple types of point cloud information
to identify salient point clouds, followed by weighted fusion to
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8500309
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Fig. 4. Saliency-net: point cloud saliency prediction framework. (a) The overall framework of Saliency-Net. (b) The initial saliency prediction module. (c)
The semantic segmentation module.
obtain the saliency ground-truth image, which ensures the reli-
ability of the calculated saliency ground truth, as exempliﬁed
in Fig. 3.
B. Point Cloud Saliency Prediction
Fig.
4
illustrates
the
Saliency-Net
for
point
cloud
saliency prediction, which comprises two primary components.
Fig. 4(a) is the overall network framework, which can be
composed of two parts: Fig. 4(b) and (c). Fig. 4(b) is the initial
point cloud saliency prediction network. We refer to U-Net
[13] using the hourglass encoder and decoder architecture; the
encoder is used to obtain the context information of the point
cloud picture, while the corresponding decoder can accurately
locate the saliency signiﬁcance area of the point cloud. In
addition, we also use residual modules, which have better
performance than regular convolutional layers. Each residual
module is deﬁned as 2×(CONV + BN + ReLU). Furthermore,
the projection image of the LiDAR point cloud is elongated in
shape. To avoid losing height information, the downsampling
module reduces the dimensions only in the width direction
with a stride of 2. The upsampling module uses transposed
convolutions with a stride of 2 and combines each upsampled
feature map with the corresponding feature map from the
encoder to leverage richer feature information at each stage.
Fig. 4(c) represents a semantic segmentation network,
whose primary function is to output semantic information of
the point cloud. The input of the part (blue horizontal line part
in the ﬁgure) comes from the feature graph extracted by the
network encoder in the ﬁrst part, while the decoder part adopts
the FID and the classiﬁcation head proposed in FIDNet [14].
In the classiﬁcation head network, we use dilated convolutions
to extract local features and aggregate them by concatenating
with the original feature tensor. Finally, a classiﬁcation layer
is used to predict semantic labels.
Finally, the outputs of b and c are concatenated along the
channel dimension, and then a simple downsampling layer
TABLE I
NETWORK PARAMETERS OF SALIENCY-NET
is applied to obtain the ﬁnal saliency map for the point
cloud. Table I records the speciﬁc network parameters of
Saliency-Net.
Saliency-Net explicitly integrates multiple point cloud fea-
tures and is trained under supervision using our designed
point cloud dataset with saliency ground truth. Compared to
methods using only single information, this approach ensures
the completeness of saliency prediction. Even in semantically
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
WANG et al.: SALIENCY-LOAM: SALIENCY-BASED LiDAR ODOMETRY AND MAPPING
8500309
sparse scenarios, it eﬀectively predicts saliency by integrating
geometric and intensity information, thereby better optimizing
SLAM tasks.
In network training, we perform supervised training on two
subnetworks using two loss functions. For the point cloud
saliency prediction network, its loss function is as follows:
L (p, g) =
X
i
|pi −gi|
(11)
pi =
exp
 xp
i

PN
i=1 exp
 xp
i
,
gi =
exp
 xg
i

PN
i=1 exp
 xg
i

(12)
where p is the predicted probability distribution of saliency
from the network, g is the probability distribution of
the ground-truth saliency for the point cloud, and x
=
(x1, . . . , xi, . . . , xN) is the set of unnormalized saliency values
for the predicted saliency map (xp) and the ground-truth
saliency map (xg).
As for the loss function used in training the semantic
segmentation head network, we use the weighted cross-entropy
loss function to supervise the network training, as shown in the
following formula, M represents the number of categories, the
value of yc is 0 or 1, pc represents the probability of predicted
pixels belong to the category c:
L = −
M
X
c=1
wcyclog (pc) , wc = N −Nc
N
.
(13)
When calculating the weight wc, N represents the total number
of pixels, and Nc represents the number of pixels with the true
class label being c.
C. Feature Matching and Pose Estimation
The line feature point Pc
l of the current frame is converted
to the reference frame as Pl in the reference frame coordinate,
the nearest line feature point to Pl in the reference frame is Al,
and the nearest line feature point Bl that locates on the laser
scanning line adjacent to the point Al, the point cloud saliency
values of these points are S Al, S Bl and S Pl. To ensure that the
identiﬁed points belong to line features within the same local
region, we set an error threshold THerror, only when the points
satisﬁed with |S Pl −S Al| < THerror and |S Pl −S Bl| < THerror
will be chosen
el = wldl =
 aS 2
Pl + b
 ˇˇˇ−−−→
PlAl × −−−→
PlBl
ˇˇˇ
255
ˇˇˇ−−−→
AlBl
ˇˇˇ
.
(14)
Diﬀerent from the tradition that takes the distance dl as the
residual term, it does not distinguish the well-characterized
point. We use the wl = (aS 2
Pl)/255 as the point cloud saliency
weight, where a and b are the constants, giving diﬀerent point
cloud features with diﬀerent weights.
For the plane feature point Pc
P of the current frame, it is
transformed into the reference frame coordinate as PP, and
then a search is performed in the reference frame to ﬁnd the
nearest plane feature point AP to the PP. Additionally, the
plane feature point BP on the same LiDAR scanning line as
AP and the plane feature point CP on the adjacent LiDAR
scanning line are also found, and these three points do not lie
on the same line.
ep = wpdp =

cS 2
Pp + d
 ˇˇˇ−−−−→
PpAp ·
−−−−→
ApBp × −−−−→
ApCp
ˇˇˇ
255
ˇˇˇ−−−−→
ApBp × −−−−→
ApCp
ˇˇˇ
.
(15)
Similarly, the point cloud saliency weight is wp
=
(cS 2
Pp + d)/255, c and d are constants and S Pp is the point
cloud saliency value of PP. So the total loss function is as
follows:
loss =
Nl
X
i=1
ei
l +
Np
X
j=1
ej
p =
N
X
i=1
e (Pi) =
N
X
i=1
e
 TPc
i

.
(16)
The key to pose estimation is to iteratively optimize the
optimal transformation matrix T, which includes the rotation
matrix R and the translation vector t, then calculate the ﬁrst-
order Jacobian matrix J of the residual with respect to the
optimization variable
J = ∂(loss)
∂T rc
=
∂
PN
i=1 e
 T r
cPc
i

∂T rc
=
N
X
i=1
∂
 e
 T r
cPc
i

∂T rc
.
(17)
The perturbation ∆T is added to the transformation matrix
T by left multiplication, and the derivative is calculated using
the Lie algebra approach
∂
 e
 TPc
i

∂δξ
= ∂(e (Pi))
∂(Pi)
∂
 TPc
i

∂δξ
.
(18)
The ﬁrst part ∂(e(Pi))/∂(Pi) is the derivative of the residual
term e(Pi) on the points Pi, Pi includes the line feature points
and plane feature points, the second part ∂(TPc
i )/∂δξ is the
derivative of point Pi on the Lie algebra δξ of perturbation term
∆T. By calculating the derivative of the residual term with
respect to the pose perturbation, the ﬁrst-order Jacobian of the
loss function with respect to the optimization variable can be
obtained, which can guide iterative optimization to compute
the best pose.
Furthermore, we propose a method capable of eﬀectively
suppressing interference from dynamic objects. Speciﬁcally,
the pose estimation results for frame-to-frame and frame-
to-local-map are computed separately. In the frame-to-frame
estimation, feature matching is constrained by saliency
weights, whereas the frame-to-map estimation is performed
without incorporating saliency constraints. If dynamic points
exist in the scene, the two estimation approaches will yield
signiﬁcant pose discrepancies. Subsequently, a threshold is
applied to evaluate the deviation between these estimates. If
the deviation exceeds the threshold, the point is considered
potentially dynamic. It is then discarded and excluded from
computation, thereby reducing the weight of dynamic points
in the pose estimation process.
The pseudocode presented in Algorithm 1 illustrates the
entire execution process of our proposed algorithm.
III. BENCHMARK RESULTS
A. Validation of the Eﬀectiveness of the Saliency Dataset
we process the KITTI dataset sequences 00–10 using the
same data processing approach and test both the original
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8500309
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Algorithm 1 Feature Matching and Pose Estimation Method
Based on Point Cloud Saliency
Input: Point cloud feature Pi in total N, tag features Plabel
i
in total Nlabel, S i is the point cloud saliency value,
Plabel
i
∈Pi, S label
i
∈S i setting the percentage threshold
value THper, and the pose deviation threshold THpose
Output: The ﬁnal pose estimation result posef
1: per = Nlabel/N;
2: if per ≤THper then:
3:
S label
i
= 0;
4:
pose1 = Estiscan
scan(Pi, S i);
5:
posef = Optim(Estimap
scan(Pi, S i, pose1), pose1);
6: else:
7:
pose2 = Estiscan
scan(Pi, S i);
8:
S tmp
i
= S label
i
, S label
i
= 0;
9:
pose3 = Estimap
scan(Pi, S i, pose2);
10:
if (pose3)T pose2 ≥THpose then:
11:
pose f = Optim(pose3, pose2);
12:
else:
13:
S label
i
= S tmp
i
;
14:
pose f = Optim(Estimap
scan(Pi, S i, pose3), pose2)
TABLE II
ABLATION STUDY ON M2DGR DATASET AND KITTI DATASET
dataset and the saliency-weighted dataset with state-of-the-
art methods. We employ our designed saliency weights to
constrain feature matching for optimizing pose estimation.
The experimental results, recorded in Table II, demonstrate
that the ATE performance of all methods improves with the
incorporation of saliency weights, conﬁrming the eﬀectiveness
of our saliency dataset.
B. Ablation Study
We conduct ablation experiments on the KITTI dataset and
the M2DGR dataset to quantitatively analyze the independent
contributions of intensity information and semantic informa-
tion from point clouds to the performance of Saliency-LOAM.
Speciﬁcally, for the w/o Intensity scheme, we remove the
intensity information from the input to the Saliency-Net. As
a result, the network relies solely on semantic and geometric
information to predict saliency. For the w/o Semantic scheme,
we disable Fig. 4(c), during training, point cloud image data
only passes through Fig. 4(b), which prevents the network
from predicting semantic information.
As shown in Table II, regardless of which type of infor-
mation is removed, the performance falls short of that of
the complete Saliency-LOAM. This demonstrates that the
intensity information and semantic information of point clouds
are complementary and indispensable for identifying more
stable feature points within the point clouds, which proves
the eﬀectiveness of the point cloud saliency mechanism.
C. State-of-the-Art Comparison
To evaluate the performance disparities between our method
and existing state-of-the-art approaches, we conduct tests on
the KITTI dataset and the M2DGR dataset. For the KITTI
dataset, we choose A-LOAM [15], F-LOAM [16], SUMA++
[17], KISS-ICP [18], MULLS [19], CT-ICP [20], X-ICP [21],
KDD-LOAM [22], SG-SLAM [10], and Intensity-SLAM [23].
For the M2DGR dataset, we select A-LOAM [15], LIO-SAM
[24], DLO [25], MARS [26], In-LIO [27], Point-LIO [28],
X-ICP [21], LOG-LIO [29], SG-SLAM [10], Intensity-SLAM
[23], and FAST-LIO2 [30]. Among them, Intensity-SLAM is a
method based on intensity information, while SUMA++ and
SG-SLAM are methods based on semantic information. We
record the results in Tables III and IV respectively.
Furthermore, we compare the computation times of these
methods on KITTI Sequence 03, as presented in Table V.
If the computational time is less than 100 ms/scan (more
than 10 Hz), it indicates the feasibility of achieving real-time
localization and mapping. We further decompose the main
time-consuming modules of the entire algorithm, including
saliency prediction, feature extraction, feature matching and
pose optimization, and map update. The results show that
saliency prediction and feature matching & pose optimization
consume the most time, providing clear directions for devel-
oping a more lightweight LiDAR SLAM system in the future.
D. Real-World Experiments
To further validate the practicality of Saliency-LOAM, we
conduct experiments in real-world environments. We evaluate
the localization performance of various methods on the campus
dataset using the absolute trajectory error (ATE) calculated
in meters. Table VI presents the performance of existing
state-of-the-art methods and our proposed method across all
sequences. It can be observed that our method outperforms the
others in most sequences, indicating its superior performance
in real-world complex environments, which demonstrates the
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
WANG et al.: SALIENCY-LOAM: SALIENCY-BASED LiDAR ODOMETRY AND MAPPING
8500309
TABLE III
SLAM PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON THE KITTI DATASET WITH ATE
TABLE IV
SLAM PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON THE M2DGR DATASET WITH ATE
TABLE V
COMPARISON RESULTS OF THE COMPUTATIONAL TIME OF ALGORITHMS
ON KITTI SEQUENCE 03
eﬀective contribution of intensity and semantic information to
the traditional geometric LiDAR SLAM technique.
To validate mapping consistency, we analyze the mapping
quality of our method, Fast-LIO2, and X-ICP on Sequence
05 and Sequence 06 of the campus dataset. During the data
collection process, we commence from the area marked by the
red box, drive around the building complex, and return to the
starting point. Therefore, under ideal conditions, the mapped
Fig. 5.
Comparison of mapping quality on Sequence 05 (top row) and
Sequence 06 (bottom row) of the campus dataset. (a) Global map. (b) Degree
of overlap between the map at the starting and ending points. (c) Magniﬁed
local details.
sections at the starting and ending points should overlap.
In Fig. 5(a) represents an example of the global map, (b)
illustrates the degree of overlap between the mapped sections
at the starting and ending points, and (c) presents an example
of local mapping quality. It is observed that, compared to
other methods, our method achieves a higher degree of overlap
between the starting and ending points, whereas other methods
exhibit noticeable deviation. Additionally, the global map
constructed by our method demonstrates superior detail.
We also conduct a quantitative analysis comparing our
proposed method with other approaches in terms of rota-
tional drift and altitude deviation. The results are recorded in
Table VII, and the corresponding data acquisition environment
and mapping outcomes are depicted in Fig. 6(a) and (b).
1) Rotary Drift Test: As shown in Fig. 6(a), this depicts
a round-trip road scenario, starting from landmark P3, reach-
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8500309
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
TABLE VI
SLAM PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON THE CAMPUS DATASET WITH ATE
TABLE VII
COMPARISON OF LOCALIZATION PERFORMANCE IN COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTS
Fig. 6.
Results of rotary drift test and height deviation test. (a) Mapping
results of large angle rotation scene. (b) Mapping results of height in
fast-changing scenes.
ing the U-turn landmark P4, performing a U-turn, and then
returning from P4 to P3. At this point, the horizontal angle
diﬀers by 180◦from the initial angle. This scenario is used
to simulate extremely large-angle rotations, which greatly
test the rotational robustness of the algorithms. We measure
the rotational robustness of each localization algorithm in
this scenario by calculating the horizontal angle between the
estimated poses at the ﬁrst and last moments (both at landmark
P3) for each algorithm.
2) Height Deviation Test: Due to the frequent misplace-
ment of the LiDAR odometry algorithm in the vertical height
direction, we conduct a test in a scenario with a two-story
height drop to simulate the rapid changes in vehicle height
within a short period of time, as shown in Fig. 6(b). Starting
from the marked point P5, we descend and ascend once before
returning to the origin. Therefore, the true height deviation
between the initial and ﬁnal moments is approximately 0 m.
By comparing the height oﬀset errors of the initial and ﬁnal
poses estimated by each method in this scenario.
As indicated in Table VII, our method can fully leverage
the surrounding saliency information, resulting in localization
outcomes that are closer to the ground truth, thereby achieving
more robust and accurate localization.
IV. CONCLUSION
This article proposes a point cloud saliency mechanism
that focuses on high-quality point cloud regions, and presents
the ﬁrst LiDAR odometry based on the point cloud saliency.
Speciﬁcally, we design a deep learning network framework to
predict point cloud saliency, considering distance information,
local curvature, intensity information, and semantic informa-
tion. Compared to existing LiDAR odometry, our method
emphasizes high-quality point cloud regions and assigns them
higher weights during the computation process, reducing the
negative impact of noise and unstable points. We validate the
eﬀectiveness of the point cloud saliency mechanism through
ablation studies and comparative experiments on the KITTI
and M2DGR datasets. To demonstrate the practicality of our
proposed method, we conduct extensive comparative experi-
ments in real-world environments, and the results show that
our LiDAR odometry method outperforms other state-of-the-
art methods, signiﬁcantly improving robustness and accuracy.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Wen et al., “Dynamic SLAM: A visual SLAM in outdoor dynamic
scenes,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[2]
F. Fu, J. Yang, J. Ma, and J. Zhang, “Dynamic visual SLAM based on
probability screening and weighting for deep features,” Measurement,
vol. 236, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 115127.
[3]
M. Xu, S. Lin, J. Wang, and Z. Chen, “A LiDAR SLAM system
with geometry feature group-based stable feature selection and three-
stage loop closure optimization,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
pp. 1–10, 2023.
[4]
H. Guo, J. Zhu, and Y. Chen, “E-LOAM: LiDAR odometry and mapping
with expanded local structural information,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1911–1921, Feb. 2023.
[5]
S. Guo, Z. Rong, S. Wang, and Y. Wu, “A LiDAR SLAM with PCA-
based feature extraction and two-stage matching,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–11, 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
WANG et al.: SALIENCY-LOAM: SALIENCY-BASED LiDAR ODOMETRY AND MAPPING
8500309
[6]
N. Li, Y. Yao, X. Xu, Y. Peng, Z. Wang, and H. Wei, “An eﬃcient
LiDAR SLAM with angle-based feature extraction and voxel-based
ﬁxed-lag smoothing,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–13,
2024.
[7]
K. Wang, S. Ma, F. Ren, and J. Lu, “SBAS: Salient bundle adjustment
for visual SLAM,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–9, 2021.
[8]
H. Li, B. Tian, H. Shen, and J. Lu, “An intensity-augmented LiDAR-
inertial SLAM for solid-state LiDARs in degenerated environments,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[9]
Z. Chen et al., “IGE-LIO: Intensity gradient enhanced tightly cou-
pled LiDAR-inertial odometry,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73,
pp. 1–11, 2024.
[10] N. Wang, H. Lu, Z. Zheng, H. Wang, Y.-H. Liu, and X. Chen,
“Leveraging semantic graphs for eﬃcient and robust LiDAR SLAM,”
2025, arXiv:2503.11145.
[11] J. Behley et al., “SemanticKITTI: A dataset for semantic scene under-
standing of LiDAR sequences,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 9297–9307.
[12] L. Itti, C. Koch, and E. Niebur, “A model of saliency-based visual
attention for rapid scene analysis,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 1254–1259, Nov. 1998.
[13] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Med.
Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham, Switzer-
land: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[14] Y. Zhao, L. Bai, and X. Huang, “FIDNet: LiDAR point cloud semantic
segmentation with fully interpolation decoding,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Sep. 2021, pp. 4453–4458.
[15] J. Zhang and S. Singh, “LOAM: LiDAR odometry and mapping in real-
time,” in Proc. Robot., Sci. Syst. Conf., Jul. 2014, pp. 1–9.
[16] H. Wang, C. Wang, C.-L. Chen, and L. Xie, “F-LOAM: Fast LiDAR
odometry and mapping,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Sep. 2021, pp. 4390–4396.
[17] X. Chen, A. Milioto, E. Palazzolo, P. Gigu`ere, J. Behley, and
C. Stachniss, “SuMa++: Eﬃcient LiDAR-based semantic SLAM,” in
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Nov. 2019,
pp. 4530–4537.
[18] I. Vizzo, T. Guadagnino, B. Mersch, L. Wiesmann, J. Behley, and
C. Stachniss, “KISS-ICP: In defense of point-to-point ICP—Simple,
accurate, and robust registration if done the right way,” IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1029–1036, Feb. 2023.
[19] Y. Pan, P. Xiao, Y. He, Z. Shao, and Z. Li, “MULLS: Versatile LiDAR
SLAM via multi-metric linear least square,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2021, pp. 11633–11640.
[20] P. Dellenbach, J.-E. Deschaud, B. Jacquet, and F. Goulette, “CT-ICP:
Real-time elastic LiDAR odometry with loop closure,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2022, pp. 5580–5586.
[21] T. Tuna, J. Nubert, Y. Nava, S. Khattak, and M. Hutter, “X-ICP:
Localizability-aware LiDAR registration for robust localization in
extreme environments,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 40, pp. 452–471, 2024.
[22] R. Huang, M. Zhao, J. Chen, and L. Li, “KDD-LOAM: Jointly
learned keypoint detector and descriptors assisted LiDAR odometry and
mapping,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2024,
pp. 8559–8565.
[23] H. Wang, C. Wang, and L. Xie, “Intensity-SLAM: Intensity assisted
localization and mapping for large scale environment,” IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1715–1721, Apr. 2021.
[24] T. Shan, B. Englot, D. Meyers, W. Wang, C. Ratti, and D. Rus, “LIO-
SAM: Tightly-coupled LiDAR inertial odometry via smoothing and
mapping,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct.
2020, pp. 5135–5142.
[25] K. Chen, B. T. Lopez, A.-A. Agha-Mohammadi, and A. Mehta, “Direct
LiDAR odometry: Fast localization with dense point clouds,” IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 2000–2007, Apr. 2022.
[26] J. Quenzel and S. Behnke, “Real-time multi-adaptive-resolution-surfel
6D LiDAR odometry using continuous-time trajectory optimization,”
in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Sep. 2021,
pp. 5499–5506.
[27] H. Zhang, R. Xiao, J. Li, C. Yan, and H. Tang, “A high-precision
LiDAR-inertial odometry via invariant extended Kalman ﬁltering and
eﬃcient surfel mapping,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–11,
2024.
[28] D. He, W. Xu, N. Chen, F. Kong, C. Yuan, and F. Zhang, “Point-LIO:
Robust high-bandwidth light detection and ranging inertial odometry,”
Adv. Intell. Syst., vol. 5, no. 7, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 2200459.
[29] K. Huang, J. Zhao, Z. Zhu, C. Ye, and T. Feng, “LOG-LIO: A LiDAR-
inertial odometry with eﬃcient local geometric information estimation,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 459–466, Jan. 2024.
[30] W. Xu, Y. Cai, D. He, J. Lin, and F. Zhang, “FAST-LIO2: Fast
direct LiDAR-inertial odometry,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 38, no. 4,
pp. 2053–2073, Aug. 2022.
Ke Wang (Member, IEEE) was born in Huaian,
Jiangsu, China, in 1984. He received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees in vehicle engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in mechanical engineering from Hunan Uni-
versity, Hunan, China, in 2007, 2009, and 2013,
respectively.
He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher at the College
of Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA, in 2016 and 2017. From 2014 to 2016,
he was an Assistant Professor with the Automobile
Engineering Department. Since 2017, he has been an
Associate Professor with the State Key Laboratory of Mechanical Transmis-
sion, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. He is the author of one book,
more than 20 articles, and more than 15 inventions. His research interests are
the intelligent vehicle, environment perception, and AI.
Kai Chen was born in Bijie, Guizhou, China,
in 2002. He received the B.S. degree in process
equipment and control engineering from Beijing
University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China,
in 2023. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
with the College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engi-
neering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.
His
research
interests
include
quantiﬁcation
and application of uncertainty and simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM).
Juwei Guo was born in Ganzhou, Jiangxi, China, in
2000. He received the B.S. degree (Hons.) in vehi-
cle engineering from Northeast Forestry University,
Harbin, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the
M.S. degree in vehicle engineering with Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China.
His
research
interests
include
simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) for intelligent
robots or vehicles, LiDAR odometry, and robotics.
Jianbo Lu (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in aerospace engineering from Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA, in 1997.
He has more than 20 years of industry experience,
including technical leadership positions. With more
than 90 articles and 150 U.S. patents in vehicle
controls, automation, safety, performance, robotics,
and mechatronics, his contributions can be found in
millions of vehicles on the road.
Dr. Lu is a fellow of SAE, ASME, and AAIA. He
received the Highest Corporate Award HFTA at Ford
Motor Company twice. He was an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON CONTROL SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY and Control Practice Engineering
(IFAC). He is on the Editorial Board of Journal of Autonomous Vehicles and
Systems (ASME).
Authorized licensed use limited to: FUDAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 14,2026 at 05:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
